TASKFLOW PROJECT DOCUMENTATION
Author: Fahad Rahman

---

1. PROJECT OVERVIEW

TaskFlow is a backend-focused task management application built using Django and Django REST Framework.

The system allows users to create, update, retrieve, and delete tasks through secure RESTful APIs. Each task is associated with a specific authenticated user to ensure data isolation.

In addition to the API, the project includes a lightweight Django template interface that demonstrates how users can interact with the backend through a dashboard-based workflow.

The application demonstrates key backend development concepts including authentication, API design, caching, rate limiting, secure data access, validation, and containerized local development.

---

2. TECHNOLOGY STACK

Backend Framework
Django

API Framework
Django REST Framework

Authentication
JWT Authentication using SimpleJWT
Session Authentication for template-based frontend

Database
PostgreSQL

Caching & Rate Limiting
Redis

Containerization
Docker
Docker Compose

Deployment Platform
Render

Other Libraries
psycopg2-binary
dj-database-url
gunicorn
django-redis

---

3. PROJECT STRUCTURE

taskflow
│
├── tasks
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── serializers.py
│   ├── views.py
│   ├── urls.py
│
├── taskflow
│   ├── settings.py
│   ├── urls.py
│
├── templates
│   └── tasks
│       ├── base.html
│       ├── home.html
│       ├── register.html
│       ├── login.html
│       ├── dashboard.html
│       ├── create_task.html
│       ├── edit_task.html
│       ├── task_detail.html
│       ├── admin_insights.html
│
├── requirements.txt
├── README.md
├── Documentation.txt
├── Dockerfile
├── docker-compose.yml
├── manage.py

---

4. DATABASE MODEL

The Task model contains the following fields:

title
status
priority
deadline
user
notes

Explanation:

title
Represents the name or description of the task.

status
Indicates the completion state of the task (pending or completed).

priority
Defines the importance level of the task (low, medium, high).

deadline
Stores the due date for the task.

user
ForeignKey linked to Django's built-in User model to ensure each task belongs to a specific user.

notes
Stores optional additional notes or details related to a specific task.

---

5. AUTHENTICATION SYSTEM

The project supports both JWT authentication for API access and session-based authentication for the Django template interface.

Session authentication enables users to log in through the web interface and manage tasks using the dashboard.

Authentication protections implemented in the project include:

• Dashboard access restricted using Django's login_required decorator
• Logged-in users are redirected away from login and registration pages
• Logout redirects users to the login page
• Browser caching is disabled on protected pages using never_cache to prevent access through the browser back button
• Username uniqueness validation during registration
• Confirm password validation during registration

API authentication endpoints:

POST /api/register/
Creates a new user account.

POST /api/login/
Generates JWT access and refresh tokens.

POST /api/token/refresh/
Refreshes expired access tokens.

---

6. TASK MANAGEMENT API

The main API resource is the Task endpoint.

Base Endpoint:

/api/tasks/

Supported operations:

GET /api/tasks/
Retrieve tasks belonging to the authenticated user.

POST /api/tasks/
Create a new task.

PUT /api/tasks/{id}/
Update an existing task.

DELETE /api/tasks/{id}/
Delete a task.

Each operation is restricted to tasks owned by the authenticated user.

---

7. FILTERING

Tasks can be filtered using query parameters.

Examples:

/api/tasks/?status=pending
/api/tasks/?priority=high

Filtering allows users to quickly retrieve specific subsets of tasks.

---

8. PAGINATION

Pagination is implemented through Django REST Framework settings to ensure efficient responses when dealing with large datasets.

This prevents large API responses and improves performance.

---

9. REDIS CACHING

Redis is used to cache frequently requested API responses.

Example:

GET /api/tasks/

When a user requests their task list, the response is cached in Redis for a short duration.

Subsequent requests retrieve the data from Redis instead of querying the PostgreSQL database again.

Cache keys are stored per user to maintain proper data isolation.

---

10. REDIS RATE LIMITING

Redis is also used to implement API rate limiting.

The system tracks the number of requests made by each user within a defined time window.

Example rule:

20 requests per minute per user

If the limit is exceeded, the API returns:

HTTP 429 – Too Many Requests

This protects the API from abuse and excessive traffic.

---

11. USER DATA ISOLATION

Each user can only access and modify their own tasks.

This is enforced in API queries using:

Task.objects.filter(user=self.request.user)

This ensures that users cannot view or modify tasks belonging to other users.

---

12. FRONTEND INTERFACE

The project includes a lightweight Django template-based interface that interacts with the backend.

Implemented pages include:

Home Page
Register Page
Login Page
Dashboard
Create Task Page
Edit Task Page
Task Detail Page
Admin Insights Page

Users can manage tasks directly through the dashboard interface.

Additional frontend functionality includes:

• Clicking a task opens a task detail page
• Each task supports additional notes that can be created, edited, and saved
• Task status can be toggled directly from the dashboard without opening the edit page
• Newer tasks are displayed first on the dashboard
• Success messages are shown for registration, task creation, task editing, task deletion, and notes updates

---

13. INPUT VALIDATION

To maintain data quality and prevent invalid data entry, several validation rules are implemented:

• Task title cannot be empty
• Task title must meet minimum length requirements
• Task title has a maximum length restriction
• Task deadlines cannot be set in the past
• Login credentials must not be empty
• Registration usernames must be unique
• Registration passwords must match using confirm password validation

These validations help prevent invalid or inconsistent data from being stored in the database.

---

14. SECURITY PRACTICES

The application implements several security practices:

• Login protection for dashboard views using login_required
• Cache prevention using never_cache to prevent dashboard access after logout
• Safe object retrieval using get_object_or_404 with user ownership checks
• User-specific filtering to prevent unauthorized data access
• Validation for authentication forms to prevent empty credentials
• API rate limiting to prevent abuse
• Admin insights page access restricted to superusers
• User deletion from admin insights restricted to superusers only

These practices ensure proper access control and application stability.

---

15. ADMIN FEATURES

The project includes a custom admin insights page for superusers.

This page provides platform-level visibility without modifying user-specific task ownership rules.

Implemented admin metrics include:

• Total users
• Total tasks
• Completed tasks
• Pending tasks
• High-priority tasks
• Overdue pending tasks

Additional admin functionality:

• Superusers can delete users from the custom admin insights page

This provides a simple platform-level management view while preserving task ownership and user isolation rules.

---

16. DEPLOYMENT

The backend application is deployed on Render.

Live API endpoint:

https://taskflow-api-yg28.onrender.com/api/tasks/

Deployment configuration includes:

• Gunicorn production server
• PostgreSQL database
• Environment configuration using dj-database-url

The project also supports containerized local development using Docker and Docker Compose.

Docker setup includes:

• Dockerfile for application containerization
• docker-compose.yml for application and PostgreSQL service orchestration
• Local containerized migrations and superuser creation

---

17. FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS

Potential improvements for the project include:

• Task search functionality
• Email notifications for approaching deadlines
• Role-based access control
• Real-time task updates using WebSockets

---

END OF DOCUMENTATION